## The importance of the interview introduction

#### July 4, 2024

As interviewers, I believe we often overlook the importance of the first five minutes of an interview. It may feel tempting to 'not waste time' and 'get to the good stuff'. On the contrary, in my experience on both sides of the table, the success of the interview is heavilly impacted by that first five minutes that many of us dismiss as fluff.

At present, I'm wrapping up needfinding interviews for Manuscript Mates. I've found these first five minutes to be key in those, but this is only the most recent application of this hypothesis. I've been interviewing candidates for engineering roles for about three years. In those three years I've repeatedly gotten feedback from recruiters and candidates that I give strong interviews. Prior to that, I'd done a healthy amount of interviews as the candidate, all the way back to internships in college. Though there are many fair critiques of the software engineering interview process, to be a software engineer often means that one is a seasoned interviewer. As a result, I've spent a lot (perhaps too much) time thinking about the interview experience.

#### Why do the first five minutes matter?

I noticed this problem, initially, on the applicant side. In college I was still quite new to the concept of interviewing My sophomore year I tried to solve a few interview problems in C. For my non-technical readers, it was a bit like trying to show I could make a PB&J by starting with bushel of wheat and grinding it into flour. Turns out it was okay to start with pre-made bread (read: language with a greater range of data structures). Novice technical blunders aside, often times I felt I could tell whether I was going to pass the interview from the first few minutes alone. Sometimes before I'd even heard the problem. Why? Because I was deriving a lot of information from the demeanor of the interviewer. Interviewers that were distant, distracted, or seemed to just want it over with. I even once had an interviewer that got out his phone and texted while I solved the technical problem. I thought that interviews were something to be survived, until one interviewer proved me wrong. 

In my final year of undergrad, I went to a conference. I was invited to an in-person tech screen for a company there. As usual, I was a bit nervous about the interview. What's more, there was a miscommunication between the booth staff which meant when I arrived, there was no room for me to interview in. My interviewer and I had to go to the cafeteria, which was pretty empty at 3pm. As we walked to the cafeteria, my interviewer asked me what I thought of the conference and the city. I responded and she gave her own thoughts. When we sat down she joked about how much our voices echoed in the empty cafeteria. Even with all of the mixups, I was a bit more relaxed.

Early into the coding problem, I lost my train of thought. My implementation had made perfect sense a second ago, but was I wrong? I got nervous and stopped writing. I explained to my interviewer that I was stuck for a second and asked for a moment to compose myself. To this day, I still remember her saying "Take your time. You can do it." I know that may sound trite but it was a huge confidence boost. I took a second and then solved that problem and all of the extension components. I got that job offer and I took it.

This interviewer took a completely different approach than the ones I'd had in the past. She acknowledged the inconvenience of the change in environment and joked about it. She was actively kind and welcoming. It wasn't a change that hugely modified the structure of the interview itself. I still had to solve an Algorithms and Data Structures problem.  Simply by putting herself in a kind, supportive role, this interviewer actually got out of my way and allowed me to perform. 

The importance of setting the interviewee up well applies for interviews of all kinds. I've used this technique in user interviews, needfinding interviews, any time I call a stranger and ask them for their opinions. As interviewers, we should expect that the interviewee could be a bit on edge. Knowing this, we should take proactive steps to diffuse that tension. It's important to build trust with our interviewees. Not only is it a kind thing to do, but that trust in turn will maximize the quality of the interview.

#### How do we build that trust?

When I interview, I, like most, start with introductions. It's common to ask interviewees who they are and what they do. In addition to this, I ask for a brief example of something that's brought them joy lately. I use that exact phrase: "Whats bringing you joy lately?" We'll both respond to those three prompts. When it's my turn to say what's bringing me joy I might mention a book I read, an event in the park I'm excited about, or a movie I'm looking forward to seeing. More broadly, something specific to me. None of their response goes in my notes, nor should it. I'm simply trying to get to know them as a person.

I've had interviewees have mentioned a range of things they enjoy, from building a new mechanical keyboard to gardening to just escaping the Boston heat. In response, I make a point of explicitly acknowledging their interest. I might note that I've always wanted to build my own mechanical keyboard. Or share that I have plants in my house but gardening outside sounds so relaxing. Perhaps I was just in Boston a few months ago and it was freezing, I cant believe it got warm so fast. All of these are true examples, by the way. I share some of my own genuine experiences in exchange, but also keep it brief so we can move on to the meat of the interview.

I've noticed this small change results in huge shifts in the demeanors of my interviewees. They appear to relax. They might smile or laugh if they make a mistake instead of tensing up. They feel comfortable telling me when they're uncertain or confused. In each of those subsequent interactions, I make sure to affirm the vulnerability they show. I might say "No worries, mistakes happen. What are you thinking now?" or "Not a problem, let me explain that a different way. Feel free to interrupt me if anything doesn't make sense." All of this support builds on the foundation of those few extra sentences at the beginning of the interview.

I believe it's important to show interest in the interviewee as a multi-dimensional person. Too often interviews reduce us to automatons who can complete a set of tasks. Yet, it's also important to respect the parameters of the surrounding environment. At the end of the day the interviewee is there to get a job, provide you with feedback, or what have you. It's important to keep these first five minutes from interfering with their ability to accomplish that goal.

#### Pitfalls to avoid

In wanting to please their interviewer, the interviewee may feel obligated to keep offering more information. Alternatively, they might launch into an enthusiastic monologue because they're genuinely passionate. In keeping with the 'set them up for success' ethos, I keep an eye on the clock. Often, at the outset, I'll say something like "Let's take five minutes for introductions then move on to the interview itself." If we're running over time, I'll say something to the effect of, "I'm sorry to jump in, but I want to leave time for the meat of the interview. It does sound like x is particularly interesting to you though. Thank you for sharing it with me." We're both incentivised to get deeper into the interview so this usually goes pretty well.

The beauty of a question like "What's been bringing you joy lately" is it lets interviewees guide the conversation. It doesn't press into anything deeply personal, but it does let them share something unique to them. It is important to avoid the deeply personal when incorporating this approach. Especially if the interview is for a job, its crucial that your question couldn't be related to a [protected class](https://www.eeoc.gov/employers/small-business/3-who-protected-employment-discrimination).  For both legal and ethical reasons, you don't want to imply that could impact the interview process. However, sometimes folks will note something in that vein up on their own. In such cases, I just give a warm but neutral acknowledgement and move on. 

#### The takeaway

On multiple occasions, I've gotten kind feedback from interviewees about how comfortable they felt during the process. In employing this technique in needfinding interviews, I found that the discussions were smoother and more fruitful. More fundamentally, feels good to know I've made someone's day a bit easier.

Starting off an interview with warmth and kindness can set the tone for the rest of the interview. You don't have to use my "what's bringing you joy lately" question word for word. In fact, if that exact wording starts popping up in all tech interviews, I worry it might sound disengenous. However, I encourage you to come up with your own way to show interest in your interviewee as a person. Compliment the artwork on the wall behind them. Do they have a personal website? Give it a preemptive scan and ask them about a hobby they mentioned. Interviews can be incredibly stressful. Infusing interviews with a bit more kindness feels like the least we can do. Better yet, you'll likely learn more from the conversation as well.

Thanks for reading and see you next time

-- Carah